Okay, just one more run.
This is the phrase I've muttered at
midnight and then again at 2:00 a.m.
every day since diving into Vampire
Crawlers.
There are nights when it feels like it'd
take an army to pull me from the
clutches of its pixelated chaos. This
deck building spin-off to indie rogueike
vampire survivors is every bit as
gripping as that original outing,
bringing both familiarity and freshness
wrapped up into a firstperson dungeon
crawling adventure. I love that Vampire
Crawlers maintains an undying commitment
to the tone, characters, and retro
visuals of its predecessor.
It is evident even from the initial
cutscene which shows a returning
character fending off hordes of
attackers in the mad forest from
survivors isometric view before
transitioning to a firstperson view of
the area. Without using a single word,
it proudly declares that a new
perspective doesn't change the fact that
this is still unquestionably vampire
survivors at its core. That being said,
where Vampire Survivors was about quick
reactions, Vampire Crawlers is about
planning and execution. Its slow
grid-based movement is merely a means to
reach the next turnbased battle in which
you now use a deck of cards to perform
gloriously ludicrous attacks against
hordes of enemies. Vampires as items
show up in the form of cards here,
ranging from damage based options like
knife, whip, and cross to support
focused options like the power
increasing spinach or healing Pumarola.
Evolutions even make their return,
letting you combine two cards into a
more powerful version that can further
devastate your foes.
New additions to the lineup are few and
far between, but it's this dedication to
serving up what players already know and
love that helps the transition into a
new format feel seamless. This time
around, you don't directly control
specific characters so much as bring
them along for the ride. referred to as
crawlers. They each have unique starting
weapons and passives, but they also
present as cards that can be played from
your deck to provide additional bonuses
for a limited time, such as increased
damage or XP boosts. Eventually, you can
bring along up to three crawlers at a
time. So, mixing and matching characters
that complement each other helps you set
the tone of your runs right out of the
gate. Choosing these crawlers is a fun
way to customize your loadout before
ever visiting a dungeon, but it's also
important since card acquisition is
otherwise largely random. While you can
banish, skip, or roll cards a limited
number of times once you've invested in
some upgrades, luck still plays some
part in the direction your deck takes
during a run. Still, Vampire Crawlers is
rarely too punishing with this, as it's
more about knowing how to play the cards
you've been dealt than it is about
minmaxing your deck. Building a
specialty deck, no doubt, improves your
chances of victory. But I was surprised
at how many times I managed to squeak by
with a mismatched hand due to deaf use
of the game's combo system.
Each card requires a specific number of
mana points to play with most falling
between zero and three. And playing them
in numerical order creates a combo that
powers up subsequent cards. This means
you'll deal a lot more damage if you
combo into an attack card, which is
great for clearing away enemies, but
it's leveraging this mechanic to improve
buffs or stats that really make a run
come together. It's very satisfying to
use combos to power up a card that
improves your max health over and over
until you become a noun unkillable tank.
New cards are granted by leveling up or
discovering unique loot spots throughout
the game's multi-level dungeons. At
least early on, it's vital to plan for
how you want to tackle a level's enemy
layouts to most easily reach potential
loot opportunities. Choosing to take on
a sub boss before clearing other enemies
on the floor may see you suffer from an
underdeveloped deck, which could leave
you with too little health to reasonably
survive the run. Conversely, managing to
ek out a win against these tougher
villains could earn you exactly what you
need to pummel every other group of
monsters on the level. The riskreward
approach is what keeps early runs
feeling enjoyably stressful. That being
said, a focus on strategic navigation
peaks during the first half of Vampire
Crawlers. Despite their random layouts,
it doesn't take long to figure out the
flow of dungeons and how to maximize
your efficiency. Moreover, as with
Vampire Survivors before it, you
eventually progress far enough in stat
upgrades and unlockables that you can
start being bolder in your approach.
Many enemies that once made you tremble,
become trivial. So, older dungeons, if
you should revisit them, begin to feel a
little more than laidback farming spots,
unless you toggle your upgrades off in
the village at least. Even so, the game
ensures your power creep doesn't get too
out of control until you near the end of
the campaign by locking certain major
mechanics behind relics found in later
stages. While most of the core stat
upgrades are pulled from the previous
game and work the same, offering
incremental increases to things like
damage, total health, and base mana
amount, relics impact the complexity of
the gameplay in more dramatic ways.
There are over a dozen of these game
altering items to discover during the
journey, and they frequently introduce
entirely new features that change the
way you approach exploration and
building decks. For instance, slotting
gems into certain cards to get a variety
of passive and active boosts can make or
break a run. So, when you discover a
relic that adds a jeweler, where you can
increase or decrease the spawn rate of
specific gems, the excitement of
choosing between so many begins to give
way to the realization that there's an
advantage to limiting your options. When
only the strongest, see, borderline
game-breaking gems are spawning, you can
ensure you're virtually always reaching
peak performance. It's in that
realization that Vampire Crawlers begins
to reveal its true end goal, making you
smile as you dispense pure carnage. In
this way, it comes full circle back to
Vampire Survivors, where you could leave
your character idle and go eat dinner
while at auto farmed for a few hours.
Here, once you've become a proficient
deck builder, you can create an
unstoppable stack of cards that lets you
plow through dungeons while spamming the
autoplay button to unleash Anarchy
without much thought. It's a sublime
payoff for the 10 to 20 hours it takes
to earn the necessary components to make
it happen. And seeing just how far you
can push things can feel like a whole
game to master unto itself. As a result,
even with everything unlocked and
nothing to work toward, Vampire Crawlers
still has its teeth in me, begging me to
dive back in and decimate all who stand
before me. Since I haven't come close to
growing tired of mowing down baddies
with the wackiest decks possible, I
guess I'll just give it one more run and
then maybe just uh one more after that.